=> /gallery/		Gallery
=> /telescope.1.txt	Docs

# Telescope

> Telescope is a w3m-like browser for Gemini.

``` Ascii art of the word “Telescope” and “v0.7”
 _______         __
|_     _|.-----.|  |.-----.-----.----.-----.-----.-----.
  |   |  |  -__||  ||  -__|__ --|  __|  _  |  _  |  -__|
  |___|  |_____||__||_____|_____|____|_____|   __|_____|
                                           |__| v0.7
```

Telescope is written entirely for fun, as a hobbystic project in my free time.  As such, it lacks a ton of features you’ll find in more mature Gemini browsers, but it also has some unique ones.

The UI is strongly inspired from Emacs and W3M, so you’ll find some familiar concepts, such as the minibuffer or the tabline, and the default keybindigs also reflect this, but care has been taken to add keys familiar for vi and CUA users too.

=> https://asciinema.org/a/426862	Asciinema record

## Install

=> https://repology.org/project/telescope/versions Some distros provide a package — thanks to the maintainers!

Source code and precompiled binaries for linux are available:

=> https://github.com/omar-polo/telescope/releases/download/0.7/telescope-0.7.tar.gz	telescope-0.7.tar.gz

=> https://git.omarpolo.com/telescope/		git repository
=> gemini://git.omarpolo.com/telescope.git/	git repository via Gemini
=> https://github.com/omar-polo/telescope	GitHub mirror

=> https://github.com/omar-polo/telescope/releases/download/0.7/telescope.aarch64	telescope.aarch64
=> https://github.com/omar-polo/telescope/releases/download/0.7/telescope.amd64		telescope.amd64

The dependencies are:
* libncurses
* libevent
* libtls (from either LibreSSL or libretls)
* yacc (or GNU bison)

Once all the dependencies are installed, building is as easy as:

```Example of how to compile from source
$ curl -LO https://github.com/omar-polo/telescope/releases/download/0.7/telescope-0.7.tar.gz
$ tar xzvf telescope-0.7.tar.gz
$ cd telescope-0.7
$ ./configure
$ make
$ sudo make install # eventually
```

A SHA256 file containing the checksums is available.  However, that only checks for accidental corruption: you can use signify (SHA256.sig and the public key telescope-0.7.pub) or GPG.  The hash of the signify public key is also included in the SHA256 file and signed with my GPG too.  The signify public key for the next release ‘telescope-0.8.pub’ is also included.

=> https://github.com/omar-polo/telescope/releases/download/0.7/SHA256			SHA256
=> https://github.com/omar-polo/telescope/releases/download/0.7/SHA256.gpg		SHA256.gpg
=> https://github.com/omar-polo/telescope/releases/download/0.7/SHA256.sig		SHA256.sig
=> https://github.com/omar-polo/telescope/releases/download/0.7/telescope-0.7.pub	telescope-0.7.pub
=> https://github.com/omar-polo/telescope/releases/download/0.7/telescope-0.8.pub	telescope-0.8.pub

```Example of how to verify the signature with signify
$ signify -C -p telescope-0.7.pub -x SHA256.sig
Signature Verified
telescope-0.7-binaries.tar.gz: OK
telescope-0.7.pub: OK
telescope-0.7.tar.gz: OK
telescope-0.8.pub: OK
telescope.aarch64: OK
telescope.amd64: OK
```


## Changelog

0.7 “Via Paolo Fabbri 43” — Released January 13, 2022

### New features

* caching: telescope will keep a in-memory copy of the visited page for some time to speed up history navigation.  See also the new command `cache-info'.
* persistent tab history: telescope will remember the full history for each tab across sessions.
* re-open closed tabs (even across sessions!)  The `u' key is now bound to `tab-undo-close' by default.
* allow to customise the space after the end of the buffer.  By default telescope now renders a vi-like tilde fringe "~", but it's fully customisable using the new `line.fringe' style identifier.  See also the new setting `fringe-ignore-offset'.

### Improvements

* ask before quitting telescope.
* execute-extended-command: execute the selected command on RET.
* bump default fill-column to 120.
* bind `del' (backspace) to previous-page.  Suggested by Florian, thanks!
* add --colours as --color alias.  Suggested by Florian.

### Bug fixes

* fixed crash on --colors.  Reported by Florian, thanks!
* don't push the current url to the history *twice* at startup.

### Breaking changes

* variable `set-title' renamed to `update-title'.  The old name will still be supported for a while to ease backwards compatibility.
